LESSON: Python - Chapter 2: Variables and Data Types
LANGUAGE: en

SLIDE 1 | What is a Variable?
A variable is a name that refers to a value stored in memory. You create one by
assigning a value with the equals sign, and you can use the name anywhere you
need that value.

  age = 30

NARRATION: A variable is a name for a value; you create it with the equals sign.

SLIDE 2 | Dynamic Typing
In Python you do not declare a type explicitly; the type is inferred from the
value you assign. The same variable can later be reassigned to a value of a
different type.
NARRATION: Python figures out the type from the value, and a variable can change type.

SLIDE 3 | Numbers: int and float
Integers are whole numbers like 30, while floats are numbers with a decimal
point like 9.99. Python switches between them automatically when needed during
arithmetic.

  price = 9.99

NARRATION: Whole numbers are ints; numbers with decimals are floats.

SLIDE 4 | Strings
A string is a sequence of characters written in single or double quotes. Strings
hold text such as names, messages, and labels.

  name = "Ada"

NARRATION: A string holds text and is written inside quotes.

SLIDE 5 | Booleans
A boolean is a value that is either True or False. Booleans are the result of
comparisons and are used to make decisions in a program.

  is_active = True

NARRATION: A boolean is either True or False and drives decisions.

SLIDE 6 | Checking a Type
The type function reveals an object's type at runtime. This is useful for
debugging and for understanding data you did not create yourself.

  type(9.99)   # <class 'float'>

NARRATION: The type function tells you what kind of value something is.

SLIDE 7 | Converting Between Types
You can convert values with functions like int, float, and str. For example,
input always returns text, so you often convert it to a number before doing
math.

  count = int("42")

NARRATION: Use int, float, and str to convert values from one type to another.

SLIDE 8 | Naming Variables
Use descriptive names so code explains itself, and prefer snake_case, which
joins lowercase words with underscores. Names cannot start with a digit or be a
Python keyword.
NARRATION: Choose clear snake_case names; they make code read like a description.

SLIDE 9 | Constants by Convention
Python has no true constants, but programmers signal a value should not change by
writing its name in all capital letters, such as MAX_SCORE. This is a convention,
not enforced by the language.
NARRATION: All-capital names are a convention for values meant to stay constant.

FACT: Variables in Python are dynamically typed; the type comes from the assigned value.
FACT: The core numeric types are int for whole numbers and float for decimals.
FACT: The type() function returns an object's type at runtime.
FACT: Use snake_case for variable names by Python convention.
FACT: The input function returns a string, so convert it with int() or float() for math.
