LESSON: Python - Chapter 9: Functions
LANGUAGE: en

SLIDE 1 | What is a Function?
A function is a named block of reusable code that performs a task. You define it
once and call it as many times as you need, which keeps programs short and
organized.
NARRATION: A function is reusable, named code you define once and call many times.

SLIDE 2 | Defining a Function
Use the def keyword, a name, parentheses for parameters, and an indented body.
The body runs only when the function is called.

  def greet():
      print("Hello!")

NARRATION: Define a function with def, a name, parentheses, and an indented body.

SLIDE 3 | Parameters and Arguments
Parameters are the names listed in the definition; arguments are the actual
values you pass when calling. They let the same function work on different data.

  def greet(name):
      print("Hello", name)

  greet("Ada")

NARRATION: Parameters are placeholders; arguments are the real values you pass in.

SLIDE 4 | Returning Values
The return statement sends a value back to the caller and ends the function. A
function with no return gives back None.

  def add(a, b):
      return a + b

NARRATION: return hands a result back to the caller and ends the function.

SLIDE 5 | Default Arguments
A parameter can have a default value used when the caller leaves it out. Defaults
make functions flexible without extra versions.

  def greet(name, greeting="Hello"):
      print(greeting, name)

NARRATION: A default value is used when the caller does not supply that argument.

SLIDE 6 | Keyword Arguments
You can pass arguments by name, which makes calls clearer and lets you skip over
defaults. Order does not matter when you use names.

  greet(name="Ada", greeting="Hi")

NARRATION: Passing arguments by name makes calls clear and order-independent.

SLIDE 7 | Scope
Variables created inside a function are local and disappear when the function
ends. Code outside cannot see them, which prevents accidental interference.
NARRATION: Variables inside a function are local and vanish when it finishes.

SLIDE 8 | Docstrings
A docstring is a string at the top of a function that describes what it does.
Tools and the help function can read it, so it serves as built-in documentation.

  def add(a, b):
      "Return the sum of a and b."
      return a + b

NARRATION: A docstring documents a function and can be read by the help function.

SLIDE 9 | Why Functions Matter
Functions remove duplication, give names to ideas, and let you test small pieces
in isolation. Well-named functions turn a long script into readable steps.
NARRATION: Functions remove repetition and turn long code into clear, testable steps.

FACT: A function is defined with the def keyword and runs only when called.
FACT: Parameters are names in the definition; arguments are the values passed in.
FACT: The return statement sends a value back; a function with no return yields None.
FACT: Default arguments are used when the caller omits that value.
FACT: Variables created inside a function are local to that function.
FACT: A docstring documents a function and is readable via the help function.
