LESSON: Python - Chapter 10: Modules and Packages
LANGUAGE: en

SLIDE 1 | What is a Module?
A module is simply a Python file containing functions, classes, and variables you
can reuse. Splitting code into modules keeps large programs organized.
NARRATION: A module is a Python file of reusable code that keeps programs organized.

SLIDE 2 | Importing a Module
The import statement loads a module so you can use its contents through its name.
You then reach inside with a dot.

  import math
  math.sqrt(16)   # 4.0

NARRATION: import loads a module, and you reach its contents with a dot.

SLIDE 3 | Importing Specific Names
The from-import form brings specific names directly into your file, so you can use
them without the module prefix.

  from math import sqrt
  sqrt(16)   # 4.0

NARRATION: from-import pulls specific names in so you can use them directly.

SLIDE 4 | Aliasing with as
The as keyword gives an import a shorter or clearer name. This is common for
libraries with long names.

  import statistics as stats

NARRATION: The as keyword renames an import to something shorter or clearer.

SLIDE 5 | The Standard Library
Python ships with a large standard library covering math, dates, random numbers,
files, and JSON, among many others. Much of what you need is already included.
NARRATION: Python's standard library already includes tools for math, dates, JSON, and more.

SLIDE 6 | A Few Handy Modules
The random module makes random choices, datetime handles dates and times, and
json reads and writes JSON text. Knowing what exists saves you from rewriting it.

  import random
  random.randint(1, 6)

NARRATION: random, datetime, and json are everyday modules worth knowing.

SLIDE 7 | Packages
A package is a folder of related modules, letting you group code into a tidy
namespace. You import from a package using dotted paths.

  from package.module import thing

NARRATION: A package is a folder of modules, imported with dotted paths.

SLIDE 8 | Installing Third-Party Packages
Beyond the standard library, the Python Package Index hosts thousands of
packages. You install them with the pip tool, usually into a virtual environment.

  pip install requests

NARRATION: Use pip to install third-party packages from the Python Package Index.

SLIDE 9 | Virtual Environments
A virtual environment is an isolated set of packages for one project, so projects
do not interfere with each other. Create one with the venv module before
installing dependencies.
NARRATION: A virtual environment isolates a project's packages so projects stay independent.

FACT: A module is a Python file of reusable code.
FACT: The import statement loads a module; from-import brings in specific names.
FACT: The as keyword creates an alias for an imported module or name.
FACT: Python includes a large standard library, such as math, random, datetime, and json.
FACT: pip installs third-party packages from the Python Package Index.
FACT: A virtual environment isolates a project's installed packages.
