LESSON: Python - Chapter 1: Getting Started
LANGUAGE: en

SLIDE 1 | What is Python?
Python is a high-level, general-purpose programming language known for clear,
readable syntax. It is used for web development, data science, automation,
scripting, and artificial intelligence.
NARRATION: Python is a popular, readable language used almost everywhere in software.

SLIDE 2 | Why Python is Readable
Python uses indentation and plain English-like keywords instead of braces and
semicolons. This makes programs easier to read and reduces the chance of small
syntax mistakes.
NARRATION: Python uses indentation and simple keywords, so code reads almost like English.

SLIDE 3 | Running Python Code
You can run Python in two main ways: interactively in the REPL, where you type
one line at a time and see results immediately, or by saving code in a file that
ends in .py and running it all at once.
NARRATION: Run code line by line in the REPL, or save it in a .py file and run the whole thing.

SLIDE 4 | Your First Program
The classic first program prints a message to the screen. The print function
displays whatever you put inside its parentheses.

  print("Hello, world!")

NARRATION: The print function shows text on the screen; this prints Hello, world.

SLIDE 5 | Comments
Comments are notes for humans that Python ignores when running the program. A
comment starts with a hash symbol and continues to the end of the line.

  # This line is a comment and does not run

NARRATION: Anything after a hash on a line is a comment and is ignored by Python.

SLIDE 6 | The print Function
print can take several values separated by commas and will put spaces between
them. By default it adds a new line at the end of its output.

  print("Score:", 95)

NARRATION: print can show several values at once, separated by spaces.

SLIDE 7 | Getting Input
The input function pauses the program and waits for the user to type something.
Whatever the user types comes back as a string of text.

  name = input("What is your name? ")

NARRATION: The input function reads what the user types and gives it back as text.

SLIDE 8 | Errors are Normal
When Python cannot run a line, it stops and prints an error message describing
what went wrong and where. Reading these messages carefully is one of the most
important programming skills.
NARRATION: Errors are normal; the message tells you what went wrong and where to look.

FACT: Python is a high-level, general-purpose programming language with readable syntax.
FACT: The print function displays output to the screen.
FACT: A comment in Python starts with a hash symbol and is ignored when the program runs.
FACT: The input function reads text typed by the user and returns it as a string.
FACT: Python source files use the .py extension.
