LESSON: Python - Chapter 11: Files and Exceptions
LANGUAGE: en

SLIDE 1 | Reading a File
The open function opens a file and returns an object you can read from. Always
read text with a clear mode, and remember files must be closed when done.

  f = open("notes.txt", "r")
  content = f.read()
  f.close()

NARRATION: open gives you a file object to read from, and the file must be closed afterward.

SLIDE 2 | The with Statement
The with statement opens a file and closes it automatically, even if an error
happens. This is the recommended way to work with files.

  with open("notes.txt") as f:
      content = f.read()

NARRATION: The with statement closes the file for you, even when errors occur.

SLIDE 3 | Reading Line by Line
You can loop over a file object to read it one line at a time, which is memory
friendly for large files.

  with open("notes.txt") as f:
      for line in f:
          print(line.strip())

NARRATION: Looping over a file reads it line by line without loading it all at once.

SLIDE 4 | Writing to a File
Opening a file in write mode replaces its contents, while append mode adds to the
end. The write method puts text into the file.

  with open("out.txt", "w") as f:
      f.write("Hello\n")

NARRATION: Write mode replaces contents; append mode adds to the end.

SLIDE 5 | What is an Exception?
An exception is an error that occurs while a program runs, such as dividing by
zero or opening a missing file. If unhandled, it stops the program.
NARRATION: An exception is a runtime error that stops the program if not handled.

SLIDE 6 | try and except
The try block holds code that might fail, and except catches the error so the
program can continue. You can catch specific exception types.

  try:
      n = int(text)
  except ValueError:
      n = 0

NARRATION: try runs risky code, and except catches the error so you can recover.

SLIDE 7 | else and finally
An optional else block runs when no exception occurred, and finally always runs,
making it ideal for cleanup such as closing resources.

  try:
      ...
  finally:
      print("always runs")

NARRATION: finally always runs, which is perfect for cleanup steps.

SLIDE 8 | Raising Exceptions
You can signal an error yourself with the raise keyword, which is useful for
rejecting invalid input. Choose a clear exception type and message.

  if age < 0:
      raise ValueError("age cannot be negative")

NARRATION: Use raise to signal your own errors when something is invalid.

SLIDE 9 | Handling Errors Well
Catch only the exceptions you can actually handle, and let unexpected ones
surface so bugs are not hidden. Clear messages make failures easy to diagnose.
NARRATION: Catch only what you can handle, and let unexpected errors surface.

FACT: The with statement automatically closes a file, even if an error occurs.
FACT: Write mode replaces a file's contents while append mode adds to the end.
FACT: An exception is an error that occurs while a program is running.
FACT: A try block holds risky code and except catches the resulting error.
FACT: The finally block always runs and is used for cleanup.
FACT: The raise keyword signals an exception yourself.
