LESSON: Python - Chapter 8: Loops and Iteration
LANGUAGE: en

SLIDE 1 | Why Loops?
A loop repeats a block of code so you do not have to write it many times. Loops
are how programs process every item in a collection or repeat until a goal is
met.
NARRATION: Loops repeat work automatically instead of copying the same code over and over.

SLIDE 2 | The for Loop
A for loop runs its body once for each item in a sequence such as a list or
string. The loop variable takes each value in turn.

  for name in ["Ada", "Alan"]:
      print(name)

NARRATION: A for loop walks through each item in a sequence, one at a time.

SLIDE 3 | The range Function
range generates a sequence of numbers, often used to repeat something a fixed
number of times. range(5) yields the numbers zero through four.

  for i in range(5):
      print(i)

NARRATION: range produces a sequence of numbers, handy for counting loops.

SLIDE 4 | The while Loop
A while loop repeats as long as its condition stays true. It is best when you do
not know in advance how many repetitions you need.

  while balance > 0:
      balance -= 1

NARRATION: A while loop keeps going as long as its condition remains true.

SLIDE 5 | break and continue
break exits a loop immediately, and continue skips to the next iteration. Both
give you finer control over how a loop runs.

  for n in numbers:
      if n < 0:
          continue
      if n > 100:
          break

NARRATION: break leaves the loop early; continue jumps to the next round.

SLIDE 6 | Avoiding Infinite Loops
A while loop that never makes its condition false will run forever. Make sure
something inside the loop moves toward ending it.
NARRATION: Always change something inside a while loop so it can eventually stop.

SLIDE 7 | Looping with enumerate
enumerate gives you both the index and the value while looping, which is cleaner
than tracking a counter yourself.

  for i, name in enumerate(names):
      print(i, name)

NARRATION: enumerate hands you the position and the value together while looping.

SLIDE 8 | Looping Over a Dictionary
Looping over a dictionary yields its keys by default; use items to get keys and
values together. This is the standard way to process labeled data.

  for key, value in data.items():
      print(key, value)

NARRATION: Use items to loop over a dictionary's keys and values together.

SLIDE 9 | List Comprehensions
A comprehension builds a new list in one readable line by transforming each item
of a sequence. It often replaces a short for loop that just appends.

  squares = [n * n for n in range(5)]

NARRATION: A list comprehension builds a new list in a single clear line.

FACT: A for loop iterates over each item in a sequence.
FACT: The range function generates a sequence of numbers for counting loops.
FACT: A while loop repeats as long as its condition is true.
FACT: break exits a loop early and continue skips to the next iteration.
FACT: enumerate yields both the index and the value during iteration.
FACT: A list comprehension builds a new list from a sequence in one line.
